Updates to Explorer docs (#5169)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/docs/collaborate/explore-projects.md

To explore the lineage graphs of tests and macros, view [their resource details pages](#view-resource-details). By default, dbt Explorer excludes these resources from the full lineage graph unless a search query returns them as results.

To interact with the full lineage graph, you can:
<expandable alt_header="How can I interact with the full lineage graph?">

- Hover over any item in the graph to display the resource’s name and type.
- Zoom in and out on the graph by mouse-scrolling.
- Grab and move the graph and the nodes.
- Right click on a node (context menu) to:

>     - Refocus on the node, including its parent and child nodes

Reviewer: Should we make an issue to do this in other areas of the docs? I think there are a few places we use "parent" and "child"?

    - Refocus on the node and it upstream nodes only
    - View the node's [resource details](#view-resource-details) page
- Select a resource to highlight its relationship with other resources in your project. A panel opens on the graph’s right-hand side that displays a high-level summary of the resource’s details. The side panel includes a **General** tab for information like description, materialized type, and other details.
    - Click the Share icon in the side panel to copy the graph’s link to your clipboard.
    - Click the View Resource icon in the side panel to [view the resource details](#view-resource-details). 

> - Use [selectors](/reference/node-selection/methods) (in the search bar) to select specific resources or a subset of the DAG. This can help narrow the focus on the resources that interest you. All selectors are available for use, except those requiring a state comparison (result, source status, and state). You can also use the `--exclude` and the `--select` flag (which is optional). Examples:

Reviewer: Could potentially start the section with 
In the search bar:
- Use
- Use
- Use

so you don't have to clarify on each step.

Author: good thought! i played around with that construction too but it looked a bit awkward as well

    - `resource_type:model [RESOURCE_NAME]` &mdash; Returns all models matching the name search
    - `resource_type:metric,tag:nightly` &mdash; Returns metrics with the tag `nightly`
- Use [graph operators](/reference/node-selection/graph-operators) (in the search bar) to select specific resources or a subset of the DAG. This can help narrow the focus on the resources that interest you. Examples:
    - `+orders` &mdash; Returns all the upstream nodes of `orders`
    - `+dim_customers,resource_type:source` &mdash; Returns all sources that are upstream of `dim_customers`
- Use [set operators](/reference/node-selection/set-operators) (in the search bar) to select specific resources or a subset of the DAG. This can help narrow the focus on the resources that interest you. For example:

>     - `+snowplow_sessions +fct_orders` &mdash; Use space-delineated arguments for a union operation. Returns resources that are upstream nodes of either `snowplow_sessions` or `fct_orders`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - `+snowplow_sessions +fct_orders` &mdash; Use space-delineated arguments for a union operation. Returns resources that are upstream nodes of either `snowplow_sessions` or `fct_orders`.
```

- [View resource details](#view-resource-details) by selecting a node (double-clicking) in the graph.
- Click the List view icon in the graph's upper right corner to return to the main **Explore** page. 

</expandable>

### Example of lineage graph

Example of exploring the `order_items` model in the project's lineage graph:

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/collaborate/dbt-explorer/example-project-lineage-graph.png" width="100%" title="Example of full lineage graph" />

## Lenses

> The **Lenses** feature is available from your [project's lineage graph](#project-lineage). Lenses are like map layers for your DAG. Lenses make it easier to understand your project’s contextual metadata at scale, especially to distinguish a particular model or a subset of models. 

Reviewer: Are we treating **Lenses** as a proper noun are is the bolded instance calling out a feature on screen? If it's the latter, can we add a blurb about where the user can find it and if it's the former should we capitalize in other areas?

Author: yeah, it's the latter. good flag for accessibility! 🙏

> When you apply a lens, tags become visible on the nodes in the lineage graph, indicating the layer value along with coloration based on that value. If you're significantly zoomed out, only the tags and their colors are visible in the graph.

Reviewer: If we're treating the feature as a proper noun, should it be capitalized here and elsewhere?

> <expandable alt_header="List of available lenses">

Reviewer: Same as above regarding capitalization

- **Default** (resource type)

> - **Materialization Type** (for example, identify incremental model dependencies)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Materialization Type** (for example, identifying incremental model dependencies)
```

> - **Lastest Status** (for example, diagnose a failed DAG region)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Lastest Status** (for example, diagnosing a failed DAG region)
```

> - **Model Layer** (for example, discover marts models to analyze)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Model Layer** (for example, discovering marts models to analyze)
```

>     - **Marts** &mdash; A model with the prefix `fct_` or `dim_`. Or, a model that lives in the `/marts/` subdirectory.

Reviewer: Can probably make these each a single sentence like this:
```suggestion
    - **Marts** &mdash; A model with the prefix `fct_` or `dim_` or a model that lives in the `/marts/` subdirectory.
```

>     - **Intermediate** &mdash; A model with the prefix `int_`. Or, a model that lives in the `/int/` or `/intermediate/` subdirectory.

Reviewer: If not that, at least the commas aren't required on the second sentence
```suggestion
    - **Intermediate** &mdash; A model with the prefix `int_`. Or a model that lives in the `/int/` or `/intermediate/` subdirectory.
```

    - **Staging** &mdash; A model with the prefix `stg_`. Or, a model that lives in the `/staging/` subdirectory.

</expandable>

### Example of lenses

Example of applying the **Materialization Type** _lens_ with the lineage graph significantly zoomed out: 

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/collaborate/dbt-explorer/example-materialization-type-lense.png" width="100%" title="Example of the Materialization type lens" />

## Keyword search {#search-resources}

> You can locate resources in your project by performing keyword search in the search bar. All resource names, column names, resource descriptions, warehouse relations, and code that match your search criteria will display as a list on the main (center) section of the page. When searching for an exact column name, the results show all relational nodes containing that column in their schemas. If there's a match, a notice in the search result indicates the resource contains the specified column. Also, you can apply filters to further refine your search results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can locate resources in your project by performing a keyword search in the search bar. All resource names, column names, resource descriptions, warehouse relations, and code matching your search criteria will be displayed as a list on the main (center) section of the page. When searching for an exact column name, the results show all relational nodes containing that column in their schemas. If there's a match, a notice in the search result indicates the resource contains the specified column. Also, you can apply filters to further refine your search results.
```

<expandable alt_header="Search features">

> - **Partial keyword search** &mdash; This is also referred to as [fuzzy search](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Approximate_string_matching).

Reviewer: Does it matter that neither of the terms used in this sentence are the title of the page we link to? Should we add a bit
```suggestion
- **Partial keyword search** &mdash; This is also referred to as [approximate string matching, or a fuzzy search](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Approximate_string_matching).
```

- **Exclude keywords** &mdash; Prepend a minus sign (-) to the keyword you want to exclude from search results. For example, `-user` will exclude all matches of that keyword from search results.
- **Boolean operators** &mdash; Use Boolean operators to enhance your keyword search. For example, the search results for `users OR github` will include matches for either keyword.

> - **Phrase search** &mdash; Surround a string of keywords with double quotation marks to search for that specific phrase. For example, the search results for `"stg users"` will include matches that contain that specific phrase. To learn more, refer to [Phrase search](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phrase_search) on Wikipedia.

Reviewer: I looked at the Wikipedia page linked - is it really adding any value here and do we want to call out Wikipedia by name as an authority? People might have different feelings about that. Not saying we shouldn't ever link to their articles, but specifically calling out Wikipedia in the body of our docs.
```suggestion
- **Phrase search** &mdash; Surround a string of keywords with double quotation marks to search for that exact phrase (for example, `"stg users"`). To learn more, refer to [Phrase search](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phrase_search) on Wikipedia.
```

Author: i received feedback from a docs review in the past to call out source name if we're not linking to our own docs so have picked up the habit to do so

fair point -- i'll remove the links

> - **SQL keyword search** &mdash; Use SQL keywords in your search. For example, the search results `int github users joined` will include matches that contain that specific string of keywords (similar to phrase searching).

Reviewer: Do we need to define supported SQL keywords? For example, looking at [this resource](https://www.w3schools.com/sql/sql_ref_keywords.asp) and `GitHub` is not on there.

Author: good callout! 

this is still beta and i'm anticipating more changes coming soon. let's monitor this and when Explorer GAs we can lean toward that level of quality

</expandable>

<expandable alt_header="Filters side panel">

The **Filters** side panel becomes available after you perform a keyword search. Use this panel to further refine the results from your keyword search. By default, Explorer searches across all resources in the project. You can filter on:

- [Resource type](/docs/build/projects) (like models, sources, and so on)
- [Model access](/docs/collaborate/govern/model-access) (like public, private)
- [Model layer](/best-practices/how-we-structure/1-guide-overview) (like marts, staging)
- [Model materialization](/docs/build/materializations) (like view, table)
- [Tags](/reference/resource-configs/tags) (supports multi-select)

Under the the **Models** option, you can filter on model properties (access or materialization type). Also available are **Advanced** options, where you can limit the search results to column name, model code, and more.  

</expandable>

### Example of keyword search

> Example of results from searching on the keyword`item` and applying the filters models, description, and code:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Example of results from searching on the keyword `item` and applying the filters models, description, and code:
```

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/collaborate/dbt-explorer/example-keyword-search.png" width="100%" title="Example of keyword search" />

## Browse with the sidebar

From the sidebar, you can browse your project's resources, its file tree, and the database. 

> - **Resources** tab &mdash; All resources in the project organized by type. Select any resource type in the list and all those resources in the project will display as a table in the main section of the page. For a description on the different resource types (like models, metrics, and so on), refer to [About dbt projects](/docs/build/projects).

Reviewer: There's a couple of places in this doc that reference the `main section` of the page. Is there a more descriptive title we can give it? Maybe something directional or describing what is contained within? 

"In the center window" or "In the Explorer pane" or something like that? "Main view" might be difficult for people using screen readers

Author: i struggled with this a bit. i do think we should have a style for calling these UI objects for consistency. 

i'll add this topic to our next team meeting. thanks!

- **File Tree** tab &mdash; All resources in the project organized by the file in which they are defined. This mirrors the file tree in your dbt project repository.
- **Database** tab &mdash; All resources in the project organized by the database and schema in which they are built. This mirrors your data platform's structure that represents the [applied state](/docs/dbt-cloud-apis/project-state) of your project. 

> <Lightbox src="/img/docs/collaborate/dbt-explorer/example-search-sidebar.png" title="Example of tabs in sidebar" />

Reviewer: The other screenshots are fine, but this one is off-center in its text. Maybe a Docusaurus thing?

<img width="462" alt="Screenshot 2024-03-28 at 5 06 49 PM" src="https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/assets/60105315/da2ab858-f3f0-43cb-bf3d-f692277ad428">

Author: filed asana ticket

To explore the lineage graphs of tests and macros, view [their resource details pages](#view-resource-details). By default, dbt Explorer excludes these resources from the full lineage graph unless a search query returns them as results.

> <expandable alt_header="How can I interact with the full lineage graph?">

Author: this is one of the ways i attempted to make the page more approachable/more welcoming. 

i did this in several places.

would love to hear what you think!

The details (metadata) available to you depends on the resource’s type, its definition, and the [commands](/docs/deploy/job-commands) that run within jobs in the production environment. 

> <expandable alt_header="What details are available for a model?">

Reviewer: For a section like this, with multiple expandables back-to-back, do you think it would be useful to request a feature similar to our side menu where when one is open, the other automatically closes?

Author: i actually like the current behavior. i like that i can view and compare specific lists without needing two tabs. but i might be an outlier. maybe we can chat about this in our next team meeting?

> - Status bar (below the page title) &mdash; Information on the last time the model ran, whether the run was successful, how the data is materialized, number of rows, and the size of the model. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Status bar** (below the page title) &mdash; Information on the last time the model ran, whether the run was successful, how the data is materialized, number of rows, and the size of the model. 
```

Author: this was deliberate actually. there is no `Status bar` UI label which is why it's not bolded. it's just referring to the area between the page title (ie resource name) and start of the tabs **General**, **Code**, etc. 

you think "parallel construction for lists" should take precedence here?

Reviewer: Yeah, there are a few places where we bold the features on the list even when it's not a UI label. Our style guide says "It's reserved for titles, headers, and UI elements." which can be construed a few different ways, but bolding here for a consistent look wouldn't be out of line.

Author: fair point, i'll fold in the bolding. thanks!

- **Code** tab &mdash; The source code and compiled code for the model.
- **Columns** tab &mdash; The available columns in the model. This tab also shows tests results (if any) that you can select to view the test's details page. A :white_check_mark: denotes a passing test. To filter the columns in the resource, you can use the search bar that's located at the top of the columns view. 

</expandable>

<expandable alt_header="What details are available for an exposure?">

> - Status bar (below the page title) &mdash; Information on the last time the exposure was updated. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Status bar** (below the page title) &mdash; Information on the last time the exposure was updated. 
```

    - **Details** section &mdash; Details like exposure type, maturity, owner information, and more.
    - **Relationships** section &mdash; The nodes the exposure **Depends On**.

</expandable>

<expandable alt_header="What details are available for a test?">

> - Status bar (below the page title) &mdash; Information on the last time the test ran, whether the test passed, test name, test target, and column name. 

Reviewer: For consistency
```suggestion
- **Status bar** (below the page title) &mdash; Information on the last time the test ran, whether the test passed, test name, test target, and column name. 
```

- **General** tab includes:
    - **Lineage** graph &mdash; The test’s lineage graph that you can interact with. The graph includes one upstream node and one downstream node from the test resource. Click the Expand icon in the graph's upper right corner to view the test in full lineage graph mode.
    - **Description** section &mdash; A description of the test.
    - **Recent** section &mdash; Information on the last time the test ran, how long it ran for, whether the test passed, the job ID, and the run ID.
    - **Details** section &mdash; Details like schema, severity, package, and more.
    - **Relationships** section &mdash; The nodes the test **Depends On**.
- **Code** tab &mdash; The source code and compiled code for the test.

</expandable>

<expandable alt_header="What details are available for each source table within a source collection?">

> - Status bar (below the page title) &mdash; Information on the last time the source was updated and the number of tables the source uses. 

Reviewer: To keep it consistent with the otheres
```suggestion
- **Status bar** (below the page title) &mdash; Information on the last time the source was updated and the number of tables the source uses. 
```

- **General** tab includes:
    - **Lineage** graph &mdash; The source’s lineage graph that you can interact with. The graph includes one upstream node and one downstream node from the source. Click the Expand icon in the graph's upper right corner to view the source in full lineage graph mode.
    - **Description** section &mdash; A description of the source.
    - **Source freshness** section &mdash; Information on whether refreshing the data was successful, the last time the source was loaded, the timestamp of when a run generated data, and the run ID.
    - **Details** section &mdash; Details like database, schema, and more.
    - **Relationships** section &mdash; A table that lists all the sources used with their freshness status, the timestamp of when freshness was last checked, and the timestamp of when the source was last loaded.
- **Columns** tab &mdash; The available columns in the source. This tab also shows tests results (if any) that you can select to view the test's details page. A :white_check_mark: denotes a passing test.

</expandable>

### Example of model details

Example of the details view for the model `supplies`: 

> <Lightbox src="/img/docs/collaborate/dbt-explorer/example-model-details.png" width="100%" title="Example of resource details" />

Author: this screenshot is hard to see, even when blown up. i leaned towards capturing all the details on one page (which is why it's hard to see) but maybe that was the wrong call. should i recapture?

Reviewer 2: yeah I may recapture on a smaller screen!
